.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt TINC.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tinc.conf
.Nd tinc daemon configuration
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr tincd 8
reads two kinds of plain-text configuration files from its
configuration directory
.Pq Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa tinc.conf
Daemon-wide
.Pq Dq server
settings.
.It Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
Per-node
.Pq Dq host
settings: one file per mesh member, including the local node.
.El
.Pp
Each line is
.Dl Ar Variable Op = Ar Value
The
.Ql =
is optional; leading/trailing whitespace and lines starting with
.Ql #
are ignored.
Variable names are case-insensitive.
Unknown variables are ignored.
For single-valued variables only the first occurrence is used;
variables marked
.Bq multiple
below may repeat.
.Pp
Variables marked
.Bq server, host
may appear in
.Pa tinc.conf
as a default and in
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
as a per-peer override.
.Pp
The
.Fl o Ar KEY=VALUE
flag of
.Xr tincd 8
overrides any file value for
.Ar KEY .
.Sh SERVER VARIABLES
.Pq Pa tinc.conf
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va Name Li = Ar NAME Pq required
This node's identifier; alphanumerics and underscore.
A value of
.Ql $HOST
substitutes the system hostname.
.It Va ConnectTo Li = Ar NAME Bq multiple
Maintain an outgoing meta-connection to
.Ar NAME .
.It Va AutoConnect Li = yes | no Pq yes
Automatically maintain about three meta-connections to randomly chosen
reachable nodes, and opportunistically open direct
.Pq Dq shortcut
connections to nodes that are receiving high relayed traffic
.Pq tincr extension to the upstream algorithm .
.It Va AddressFamily Li = ipv4 | ipv6 | any Pq any
Address families to listen on and dial.
.It Va BindToAddress Li = Ar HOST Op Ar PORT Bq multiple
Bind listening sockets to
.Ar HOST .
The first entry is also used as the source address for outgoing
connections.
.It Va ListenAddress Li = Ar HOST Op Ar PORT Bq multiple
Additional listening address; unlike
.Va BindToAddress
it does not affect outgoing connections.
.It Va BindToInterface Li = Ar IFACE
Bind sockets to
.Ar IFACE
.Pq Dv SO_BINDTODEVICE .
.It Va Mode Li = router | switch | hub Pq router
Routing layer:
.Sy router
is L3 over a TUN device;
.Sy switch
and
.Sy hub
are L2 over a TAP device.
Not reloadable.
.It Va Device Li = Ar PATH
TUN/TAP device node (default
.Pa /dev/net/tun
on Linux).
.It Va DeviceType Li = tun | tap | dummy | fd
Override device-type autodetection.
.It Va Interface Li = Ar NAME
Network interface name to assign to the device.
.It Va DeviceStandby Li = yes | no Pq no
Defer
.Pa tinc-up
until the first peer becomes reachable, and run
.Pa tinc-down
when the last becomes unreachable.
.It Va Forwarding Li = off | internal | kernel Pq internal
.Sy off
drops packets not addressed to us;
.Sy kernel
writes every received packet to the device and lets the OS route.
.It Va Broadcast Li = no | mst | direct Pq mst
How to deliver broadcast/multicast packets.
.It Va BroadcastSubnet Li = Ar ADDRESS Ns Oo / Ns Ar PREFIX Oc Bq multiple
In router mode, treat destinations in
.Ar ADDRESS
as broadcast.
.It Va DecrementTTL Li = yes | no Pq no
Decrement the inner IP TTL on forwarded packets.
.It Va DirectOnly Li = yes | no Pq no
Reply with ICMP
.Dq net unreachable
instead of relaying via an intermediate node.
.It Va PriorityInheritance Li = yes | no Pq no
Copy the inner packet's TOS/traffic-class to the outer UDP socket.
.It Va TunnelServer Li = yes | no Pq no
Hub mode: do not gossip indirect topology to peers.
Implies
.Va StrictSubnets .
.It Va StrictSubnets Li = yes | no Pq no
Only accept
.Va Subnet
claims that are present in the local
.Pa hosts/
files.
.It Va LocalDiscovery Li = yes | no Pq yes
Probe peers' LAN-side addresses learned from edge gossip.
.It Va UDPDiscovery Li = yes | no Pq yes
Enable UDP reachability/hole-punching probes.
When
.Sy no ,
all traffic is tunnelled over TCP.
.It Va UDPDiscoveryInterval Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 2
Probe interval while UDP is unconfirmed.
.It Va UDPDiscoveryKeepaliveInterval Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 10
Probe interval while UDP is confirmed (NAT keep-alive).
.It Va UDPDiscoveryTimeout Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 30
Declare UDP dead after this long without a reply.
.It Va UDPInfoInterval Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 5
Debounce for relaying UDP-address gossip.
.It Va MTUInfoInterval Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 5
Debounce for relaying path-MTU gossip.
.It Va PingInterval Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 60
Send a meta-connection keep-alive after this much idle time.
.It Va PingTimeout Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 5
Close a meta-connection that does not answer a ping.
.It Va MaxTimeout Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 900
Cap on the exponential reconnect backoff.
.It Va MaxConnectionBurst Li = Ar N Pq 10
Tarpit incoming connections beyond
.Ar N
per second.
.It Va MaxOutputBufferSize Li = Ar BYTES Pq 10\(muMTU
Random-early-drop threshold for buffered TCP-tunnelled packets.
.It Va KeyExpire Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 3600
Force an SPTPS rekey on every tunnel at this interval.
.It Va ReplayWindow Li = Ar PACKETS Pq 32
Datagram anti-replay window size.
.It Va MACExpire Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 600
Lease time for learned MAC addresses in switch mode.
.It Va InvitationExpire Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 604800
Reject invitations older than this.
.It Va Proxy Li = Ar TYPE Ar ...
Dial outgoing connections through a proxy.
.Ar TYPE
is one of
.Sy socks4 ,
.Sy socks5 ,
.Sy http ,
or
.Sy exec ;
arguments depend on the type.
.It Va FWMark Li = Ar MARK Pq 0
Set
.Dv SO_MARK
on all sockets (Linux).
.It Va UDPRcvBuf Li = Ar BYTES Pq 1048576
.It Va UDPSndBuf Li = Ar BYTES Pq 1048576
UDP socket receive/send buffer sizes.
.It Va ProcessPriority Li = low | normal | high
.Xr setpriority 2
the daemon to nice 10/0/\(mi10.
.It Va LogLevel Li = Ar N
Debug level (0\(en5); used when
.Fl d
was not given on the command line.
.It Va Sandbox Li = none | normal | high Pq none
Restrict the daemon after setup using Landlock and seccomp (Linux).
.It Va ScriptsInterpreter Li = Ar PATH
Run hook scripts as
.Ar PATH Pa script
instead of executing them directly.
.It Va Ed25519PrivateKeyFile Li = Ar PATH Pq Pa ed25519_key.priv
Path to the local Ed25519 private key.
.It Va UPnP Li = yes | udponly | no Pq no
Ask the LAN gateway via NAT-PMP/UPnP-IGD to forward the listening
port.
.It Va UPnPDiscoverWait Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 5
SSDP discovery timeout.
.It Va UPnPRefreshPeriod Li = Ar SECONDS Pq 60
Re-request the port mapping at this interval.
.It Va DhtDiscovery Li = yes | no Po no Pc Bq tincr extension
Publish this node's reflexive address(es) to the BitTorrent Mainline
DHT (BEP\ 44, keyed by the Ed25519 public key) and resolve peers'
addresses the same way.
.It Va DhtBootstrap Li = Ar HOST:PORT Bq multiple, tincr extension
DHT bootstrap nodes; replaces the built-in public seed list.
.It Va DhtSecretFile Li = Ar PATH Bq tincr extension
32-byte mesh-wide secret (raw or one base64 line) mixed into the DHT
record key derivation, so that
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
alone is insufficient to locate or decrypt a published record.
.It Va DNSAddress Li = Ar ADDRESS Bq multiple, tincr extension
Serve a DNS stub resolver on
.Ar ADDRESS
that answers
.Ar NODE Ns Va .DNSSuffix
from the subnet table.
.It Va DNSSuffix Li = Ar DOMAIN Bq tincr extension
Zone suffix for the stub resolver.
.El
.Ss Accepted but ignored
The following server variables are recognised by the parser for
compatibility with the C implementation but have no effect in this
build:
.Va ExperimentalProtocol
(always on),
.Va Hostnames ,
.Va IffOneQueue ,
.Va PrivateKeyFile ,
.Va ScriptsExtension ,
.Va VDEGroup ,
.Va VDEPort .
.Va GraphDumpFile
and
.Va PrivateKey
are obsolete.
.Sh HOST VARIABLES
.Pq Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va Address Li = Ar HOST Op Ar PORT Bq multiple
Reachable address(es) of
.Ar NAME .
Required for any node listed in
.Va ConnectTo .
.It Va Port Li = Ar PORT Pq 655
TCP/UDP port
.Ar NAME
listens on.
The local node's own
.Va Port
goes in its own host file, not in
.Pa tinc.conf .
.It Va Subnet Li = Ar ADDRESS Ns Oo / Ns Ar PREFIX Oc Ns Oo # Ns Ar WEIGHT Oc Bq multiple
Subnet owned by
.Ar NAME ;
in switch mode, a MAC address.
.It Va Ed25519PublicKey Li = Ar KEY
The node's Ed25519 public key (tinc base64).
Alternatively a PEM block may be appended to the host file.
.It Va Ed25519PublicKeyFile Li = Ar PATH Bq server, host
Read the public key from
.Ar PATH .
.It Va Weight Li = Ar N Bq server, host
Fixed edge weight for routing decisions; overrides the measured RTT.
.It Va PMTU Li = Ar BYTES Bq server, host
Clamp the path MTU towards this node.
.It Va PMTUDiscovery Li = yes | no Po yes Pc Bq server, host
Probe for the actual path MTU.
.It Va ClampMSS Li = yes | no Po yes Pc Bq server, host
Rewrite TCP MSS in forwarded SYN segments to fit the path MTU.
.It Va Compression Li = Ar LEVEL Po 0 Pc Bq server, host
Compression level peers should use towards us: 0 none, 1\(en9 zlib,
12 LZ4.
LZO (10\(en11) is not available in this build.
.It Va IndirectData Li = yes | no Po no Pc Bq server, host
Always route data to this node via the meta-connection path, even when
direct UDP would be possible.
.It Va TCPOnly Li = yes | no Po no Pc Bq server, host
Never send UDP to this node.
.El
.Ss Accepted but ignored
.Va Cipher ,
.Va Digest
and
.Va MACLength
configure the legacy (pre-SPTPS) protocol and are ignored.
.Va PublicKey
and
.Va PublicKeyFile
.Pq RSA
are obsolete.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /tinc.conf
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /conf.d/*.conf
Additional server configuration fragments.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tinc 8 ,
.Xr tincd 8
