.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt TINCD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tincd
.Nd tinc VPN daemon (Rust implementation)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl DLR
.Op Fl c Ar DIR
.Op Fl n Ar NETNAME
.Op Fl d Ns Op Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl o Ar [HOST.]KEY=VALUE
.Op Fl U Ar USER
.Op Fl -logfile Ns Op = Ns Ar FILE
.Op Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
.Op Fl -socket Ns = Ns Ar FILE
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the daemon component of tincr, a wire-compatible Rust
reimplementation of the tinc 1.1 mesh VPN.
It reads its configuration from
.Xr tinc.conf 5 ,
opens a TUN/TAP device, establishes authenticated meta-connections to
peers, and routes encrypted packets between the virtual device and the
mesh.
.Pp
By default
.Nm
forks into the background.
Under
.Xr systemd 1
run it foreground with
.Fl D
and use
.Sy Type=notify ;
journald captures stderr.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl -config Ns = Ns Ar DIR
Read configuration from
.Ar DIR
instead of
.Pa /etc/tinc Ns Op / Ns Ar NETNAME .
.It Fl n , Fl -net Ns = Ns Ar NETNAME
Use the network
.Ar NETNAME ;
configuration is read from
.Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME .
The
.Ev NETNAME
environment variable is consulted when
.Fl n
is not given.
A value of
.Dq \&.
means no netname.
.It Fl o , Fl -option Ns = Ns Ar [HOST.]KEY=VALUE
Set a configuration option, overriding
.Xr tinc.conf 5 .
May be repeated.
The
.Sq =
is optional;
.Dq Fl o Li "Port 655"
is accepted.
.It Fl D , Fl -no-detach
Do not fork into the background.
Implied under systemd socket activation.
.It Fl d , Fl -debug Ns Op = Ns Ar LEVEL
Set debug level (0\(en5), or increment it when given without an
argument.
0 maps to
.Sy info ,
1\(en2 to
.Sy debug ,
3+ to
.Sy trace .
.Ev RUST_LOG
overrides this and accepts per-target filters.
.It Fl L , Fl -mlock
Lock the process into RAM with
.Xr mlockall 2 .
Exits on failure.
.It Fl -logfile Ns Op = Ns Ar FILE
Write log output to
.Ar FILE
(default:
.Pa /var/log/tinc Ns Oo . Ns Ar NETNAME Oc Ns .log ) .
The file is opened once and is
.Em not
reopened on
.Dv SIGHUP ;
use
.Sy copytruncate
in
.Xr logrotate 8 .
.It Fl U , Fl -user Ns = Ns Ar USER
Drop privileges to
.Ar USER
after opening the device, binding sockets, and running
.Pa tinc-up .
.It Fl R , Fl -chroot
.Xr chroot 2
to the configuration directory after setup.
.It Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
Write PID and control cookie to
.Ar FILE
(default:
.Pa /var/run/tinc Ns Oo . Ns Ar NETNAME Oc Ns .pid ,
or
.Pa CONFDIR/pid
when
.Pa /var
is not writable).
.It Fl -socket Ns = Ns Ar FILE
Bind the control socket at
.Ar FILE .
Default: the pidfile path with
.Pa .pid
replaced by
.Pa .socket .
.It Fl -bypass-security
Accepted and ignored with a warning; not implemented in this build.
.It Fl s , Fl -syslog
Not supported.
Use
.Fl D
(journald) or
.Fl -logfile .
.It Fl -help
Print usage and exit.
.It Fl -version
Print version, protocol version, and exit.
.El
.Sh SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width "TERM, INT, QUIT" -compact
.It Dv TERM , INT , QUIT
Clean shutdown; runs
.Pa tinc-down .
.It Dv HUP
Reload configuration (see
.Sx RELOAD ) .
.It Dv ALRM
Reset outgoing-connection backoff and retry immediately.
.It Dv USR1 , USR2
Ignored.
Use
.Ql tinc dump ...
for state inspection.
.El
.Ss RELOAD
.Dv SIGHUP
re-reads
.Pa tinc.conf
and
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
and applies
.Va Subnet
and
.Va ConnectTo
changes, the soft timing/behaviour settings, and the invitation key.
Any peer whose
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME
mtime changed is disconnected.
It does
.Em not
re-apply
.Va Port ,
.Va BindToAddress ,
.Va ListenAddress ,
.Va AddressFamily ,
.Va Device ,
.Va DeviceType ,
.Va Interface ,
.Va Mode ,
or private-key paths; restart for those.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "STATE_DIRECTORY" -compact
.It Ev NETNAME
Fallback for
.Fl n .
.It Ev RUST_LOG
.Xr env_logger 7 Ns -style
log filter; overrides
.Fl d
and
.Va LogLevel .
.It Ev LISTEN_PID , Ev LISTEN_FDS
.Xr sd_listen_fds 3
socket activation.
When set and matching,
.Nm
adopts the passed TCP listener(s), opens the paired UDP socket itself,
and forces foreground mode.
.Va BindToAddress ,
.Va ListenAddress
and
.Va Port
are ignored.
.It Ev NOTIFY_SOCKET
.Xr sd_notify 3
endpoint;
.Nm
sends
.Sy READY=1
after setup and
.Sy WATCHDOG=1
when
.Ev WATCHDOG_USEC
is set.
.It Ev WATCHDOG_USEC
Arms periodic watchdog keep-alives at half the given interval.
.It Ev STATE_DIRECTORY
When set, the address cache and
.Pa dht_nodes
persistence file are stored under it instead of the configuration
directory.
.It Ev TINC_UMBILICAL
Internal pipe protocol used by
.Ql tinc start .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /tinc.conf
Daemon configuration; see
.Xr tinc.conf 5 .
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /hosts/
Per-node host files (public keys, addresses, subnets).
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /ed25519_key.priv
Default Ed25519 private key.
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /tinc-up , tinc-down , host-up , host-down , subnet-up , subnet-down
Hook scripts; run with the configuration directory as working
directory.
.It Pa /etc/tinc/ Ns Ar NETNAME Ns /invitations/
Outstanding invitations and the invitation private key.
.It Pa /var/run/tinc Ns Oo . Ns Ar NETNAME Oc Ns .pid
PID and control cookie.
.It Pa /var/run/tinc Ns Oo . Ns Ar NETNAME Oc Ns .socket
Unix-domain control socket.
.It Pa /var/log/tinc Ns Oo . Ns Ar NETNAME Oc Ns .log
Default log file when detaching.
.It Pa $STATE_DIRECTORY/cache/
Per-peer address cache.
.It Pa $STATE_DIRECTORY/dht_nodes
Persisted Mainline DHT routing-table seeds
.Pq tincr extension .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
On argument-parse, configuration, device-open, bind, or
.Xr mlockall 2
failure
.Nm
exits 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tinc.conf 5 ,
.Xr tinc 8 ,
.Xr tinc-auth 8 ,
.Xr tinc-dht-seed 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
tincr is maintained at
.Lk https://github.com/Mic92/tincr .
The tinc protocol and configuration format are by
.An Ivo Timmermans
and
.An Guus Sliepen .
