.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt TINC 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tinc
.Nd tinc VPN control and configuration utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c Ar DIR
.Op Fl n Ar NETNAME
.Op Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
.Op Fl b
.Op Fl -force
.Ar COMMAND
.Op Ar ARG ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates and inspects tinc configuration on disk and talks to a running
.Xr tincd 8
over its control socket.
.Pp
Global options must precede the command name.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl -config Ns = Ns Ar DIR
Use
.Ar DIR
as the configuration directory.
.It Fl n , Fl -net Ns = Ns Ar NETNAME
Select the network
.Ar NETNAME ;
.Ev NETNAME
is the fallback.
.It Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
Locate the running daemon's pidfile and control socket via
.Ar FILE .
.It Fl b , Fl -batch
Accepted for compatibility; this build never prompts.
.It Fl -force
Override safety checks (overwrite on
.Cm import ,
allow obsolete variables in
.Cm set ,
accept unsafe variables in
.Cm join ) .
.It Fl -help , Fl -version
Print help or version and exit.
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Ss Configuration
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm init Ar NAME
Create
.Pa tinc.conf ,
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NAME ,
and a fresh Ed25519 key pair.
Reads
.Ar NAME
from stdin if omitted and stdin is not a terminal.
.It Cm get Ar [NODE.]VARIABLE
Print the value(s) of
.Ar VARIABLE
from
.Pa tinc.conf
or
.Pa hosts/ Ns Ar NODE .
.It Cm set Ar [NODE.]VARIABLE VALUE
Set
.Ar VARIABLE
to
.Ar VALUE ,
replacing any existing values, then reload the daemon if running.
.It Cm add Ar [NODE.]VARIABLE VALUE
Append
.Ar VALUE
for a multi-valued
.Ar VARIABLE
.Pq e.g.\& Va Subnet , Va ConnectTo .
.It Cm del Ar [NODE.]VARIABLE Op Ar VALUE
Remove all occurrences, or only those matching
.Ar VALUE .
.It Cm config Op Cm get | set | add | del | replace | change Ar ...
Umbrella form of the above; bare
.Cm config Ar VARIABLE
defaults to
.Cm get .
.It Cm edit Ar FILE
Open
.Ar FILE
.Pq Pa tinc.conf , tinc-up , or a host name
in
.Ev VISUAL Ns / Ns Ev EDITOR Ns / Ns Cm vi ,
then reload the daemon.
.It Cm fsck
Check configuration files for problems; exits non-zero on error.
.It Cm network
List networks (subdirectories with a
.Pa tinc.conf )
under
.Pa /etc/tinc .
The
.Dq switch network
form is not supported; use
.Fl n .
.El
.Ss Key management
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm generate-ed25519-keys
Generate a new Ed25519 key pair into the configuration directory.
.It Cm generate-keys
Same as
.Cm generate-ed25519-keys
.Pq RSA is not supported in this build .
.It Cm generate-rsa-keys Op Ar BITS
No-op; prints a warning and exits 0.
Kept for compatibility with init scripts.
.It Cm sign Op Ar FILE
Write a signed copy of
.Ar FILE
(or stdin) to stdout.
.It Cm verify Ar NODE | * | \&. Op Ar FILE
Verify a file produced by
.Cm sign .
.Ql *
accepts any known node;
.Ql \&.
means our own key.
.El
.Ss Host exchange
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm export
Write the local node's host file to stdout.
.It Cm export-all
Write all host files to stdout, separated by
.Ql #---------------------------------------------------------------# .
.It Cm import
Read host file(s) from stdin and write them under
.Pa hosts/ .
With
.Fl -force ,
overwrite existing files.
.It Cm exchange , Cm exchange-all
.Cm export
.Pq or Cm export-all
followed by
.Cm import .
.It Cm invite Ar NODE
Generate an invitation URL for
.Ar NODE
and print it to stdout.
.It Cm join Op Ar URL
Join a network using an invitation URL (read from stdin if omitted).
.El
.Ss Daemon control
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm start Op Ar tincd-options ...
Spawn
.Xr tincd 8
with derived
.Fl -pidfile
and
.Fl -socket ,
passing extra arguments through.
.It Cm stop
Ask the running daemon to terminate.
.It Cm restart Op Ar tincd-options ...
.Cm stop
then
.Cm start .
.It Cm reload
Partial configuration reload (see
.Xr tincd 8
.Sx RELOAD ) .
.It Cm retry
Reset outgoing-connection backoff and reconnect immediately.
.It Cm purge
Forget unreachable nodes and their subnets.
.It Cm debug Op Ar N
Show or set the daemon's debug level.
Without
.Ar N ,
prints the current level.
.It Cm disconnect Ar NODE
Close the meta-connection with
.Ar NODE .
.It Cm pid
Print the daemon's PID.
.El
.Ss Diagnostics
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm dump | list Oo Cm reachable Oc Cm nodes
.It Cm dump edges | subnets | connections
.It Cm dump graph | digraph
.It Cm dump invitations
List the corresponding daemon state in a script-friendly form.
.Cm graph
output is in
.Xr dot 1
format.
.Cm dump invitations
reads
.Pa invitations/
and works without a running daemon.
.It Cm info Ar NODE | SUBNET | ADDRESS
Show details about a node, or which node owns an address.
.It Cm top
Real-time per-node traffic counters in a curses-style view.
Press
.Sy q
to quit.
.It Cm log Op Ar LEVEL
Stream the daemon's log to stdout until interrupted.
.It Cm pcap Op Ar SNAPLEN
Stream tunnelled packets in
.Xr pcap 3
format to stdout, e.g. into
.Ql wireshark -k -i - .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tinc.conf 5 ,
.Xr tinc-auth 8 ,
.Xr tincd 8
