.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt TINC-AUTH 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tinc-auth
.Nd nginx auth_request backend for tinc node identity
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n Ar NETNAME
.Op Fl c Ar DIR
.Op Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
.Op Fl -listen-socket Ns = Ns Ar PATH
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
listens on a Unix-domain socket and answers
.Xr nginx 8
.Sy auth_request
sub-requests.
For each request it reads the
.Sy Remote-Addr
header (set to
.Va $remote_addr
by the nginx configuration), connects to the local
.Xr tincd 8
control socket, and performs a longest-prefix match against the
running daemon's subnet table.
.Pp
The listening socket is taken from systemd socket activation
.Pq Ev LISTEN_FDS , exactly one stream socket
when available, otherwise from
.Fl -listen-socket .
The
.Xr tincd 8
control socket is located via
.Fl -pidfile
or
.Fl n Ns \&/ Ns Fl c ,
exactly as for
.Xr tinc 8 .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl n , Fl -net Ns = Ns Ar NETNAME
Network name; also reported in the
.Sy Tinc-Net
header.
.It Fl c , Fl -config Ns = Ns Ar DIR
Configuration directory.
.It Fl -pidfile Ns = Ns Ar FILE
Path to
.Xr tincd 8 Ap s
pidfile (the control socket path is derived from it).
.It Fl -listen-socket Ns = Ns Ar PATH , Fl -sockpath Ns = Ns Ar PATH
Unix socket to accept nginx sub-requests on.
Ignored under socket activation.
.It Fl -help , Fl -version
Print help or version and exit.
.El
.Sh RESPONSES
.Bl -tag -width "503 Service Unavailable" -compact
.It Sy 204 \&No Content
.Sy Remote-Addr
matched a tinc subnet.
The response carries:
.Bl -tag -width "Tinc-Subnet" -offset indent -compact
.It Sy Tinc-Node
Owning node name.
.It Sy Tinc-Net
.Ar NETNAME
(empty if none was given).
.It Sy Tinc-Subnet
The matching subnet.
.El
.It Sy 401 Unauthorized
No subnet contains the address, or
.Sy Remote-Addr
did not parse as an IP address.
.It Sy 400 Bad Request
.Sy Remote-Addr
header missing, or the request was malformed.
.It Sy 503 Service Unavailable
.Xr tincd 8
is not running or its control socket is unreachable.
.El
.Pp
.Sy (broadcast)
subnets are never reported as a match.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
location = /_tinc_auth {
    internal;
    proxy_pass http://unix:/run/tinc-auth.sock;
    proxy_pass_request_body off;
    proxy_set_header Remote-Addr $remote_addr;
}
location / {
    auth_request /_tinc_auth;
    auth_request_set $tinc_node $upstream_http_tinc_node;
    proxy_set_header X-Tinc-Node $tinc_node;
    proxy_pass http://backend;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nginx 8 ,
.Xr tinc 8 ,
.Xr tincd 8
.Sh CAVEATS
.Nm
authenticates the tinc
.Em node ,
not a human user.
Any process on a node that owns a matching subnet appears as that node.
