.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt TINC-DHT-SEED 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tinc-dht-seed
.Nd Mainline DHT seed swarm and resolver for DhtDiscovery
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar BASE_PORT
.Op Ar COUNT Op Ar SELF_HOST
.Nm
.Fl -resolve
.Op Fl -secret-file Ar PATH
.Ar PUBKEY
.Op Ar BOOTSTRAP_HOST:PORT
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a test/bootstrap helper for the
.Va DhtDiscovery
mechanism in
.Xr tincd 8 .
.Pp
In its first form it runs
.Ar COUNT
.Pq default 1
Mainline DHT nodes bound to UDP ports
.Ar BASE_PORT .. BASE_PORT Ns + Ns Ar COUNT Ns \(mi1
and blocks until killed.
.Ar SELF_HOST
.Pq default Li 127.0.0.1
is the externally reachable address the seeds use to bootstrap to each
other; set it to the host's LAN/WAN address when clients are remote, so
that referrals carry a followable address instead of loopback.
For each bound port a line
.Dl tinc-dht-seed listening on 0.0.0.0: Ns Ar PORT
is printed to standard output.
.Pp
With
.Fl -resolve ,
.Nm
performs a one-shot lookup:
it derives the BEP\ 44 target from the tinc-base64 Ed25519 public key
.Ar PUBKEY
.Pq and the secret, if given ,
fetches and decrypts the record, prints the plaintext address line to
standard output, and exits.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -resolve
One-shot lookup mode.
.It Fl -secret-file Ar PATH
Mesh secret in the same format as
.Va DhtSecretFile
.Pq raw 32 bytes or one base64 line .
.It Ar BOOTSTRAP_HOST:PORT
Dial only this DHT node.
When omitted,
.Fl -resolve
uses the same public bootstrap list as
.Xr tincd 8 .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
Seed mode exits non-zero on bind failure.
.Fl -resolve
exits 0 when a record was found and decrypted, 1 otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tinc.conf 5
.Pq Va DhtDiscovery , Va DhtBootstrap , Va DhtSecretFile ,
.Xr tincd 8
